---
layout: post
title: "Fillers & Spillers"
---

Johnathan “Wolf” Rentzsch talked about [*Fillers & Spillers*](https://vimeo.com/80646309)” at Çingleton 3 (2013) in Montréal, an indie conference for developers. The theme of Çingleton 3 was *Core Values*, “[that which we keep constant amidst change](https://web.archive.org/web/20130817113219/http://cingleton.com/).” Rentzsch’s take on the theme relates to his disappointment at the development community's lack of resistance to the devisive issue of Section 3.3.1 of the iOS Program License Agreement in April 2010. Apple mandated that iOS apps be “originally written in Objective-C, C, C++, or JavaScript,” [effectively banning Adobe Flash based apps](http://daringfireball.net/2010/04/iphone_agreement_bans_flash_compiler) from the App Store.

Apple's intentions and merits in changing §3.3.1 generated much debate between those that saw Apple as a ruthless corporation trampling on the freedom of developers, and those that saw pragmatism in avoiding a situation such as the [North American video game crash of 1983](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_American_video_game_crash_of_1983) by preserving the quality and integrity of the iOS platform. In his Çingleton talk, four years after the fact, Rentzsch looked back at the issue from a very different perspective, that of the roles of *fillers* and *spillers* in human technological development.

Rentzsch argues that all of humanity's progress hinges on technology, and that technology has enriched humanity to the point where we can be nice to many strangers. Beyond just our immediate family or tribe, we can afford to be nice to people we don't know or don't particularly care about. Progress is made as a result of less resource contention and greater levels of education leading to an informed populace. Collectively, humankind contributes to shared pools of technology, each with their own shared knowledge, tools, and networks of people.

Consider *science* as a pool. We might say that published papers are shared knowledge, microscopes and formulas are tools, and institutions and conferences are networks of people. For any given pool, Rentzsch asserts that there are two types of actors.

**Fillers** contribute to a shared pool. Each pool develops its own vocabulary, value systems, cliques, and controveries. For fillers, pushing the human race forward means to discover and invent. They produce the fundamental building blocks that enable progress. Researchers that spend years generating hypotheses, gathering evidence, forming theories, and publishing papers are an example of a science filler.

**Spillers** aren't content with just staying within the confines of their chosen field's bubble. Like the Greek Titan Prometheus who [gifted mankind with fire stolen from Mount Olympus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus), they seek to share the pool's bounty with the masses in the form of knowledge and artifacts. They are translators that make a pool accessible to people who are not as informed and steeped in the knowledge of a pool as fillers. Spillers are catalysts connecting pools with the rest of humankind, but they are not the foundation. University science professors or magazines like [Popular Science](http://www.popsci.com) are examples of science spillers.

Fillers and spillers have an interdependent relationship. By themselves, fillers are simply geeks in a room chipping away at their technology, forever wanting to learn more and build more. On the other hand, spillers by theselves would stagnate from a lack of progress, and become trapped recycling the past.

## Fillers and Spillers in IT

The popular culture view of IT is that of an insular, technology-centric group. Television shows such as [The IT Crowd](http://www.channel4.com/entertainment/tv/microsites/I/itcrowd) poke fun at the stereotypical IT person as someone who spouts undecipherable technical jargon, interacts poorly with outside people, and is best relegated to the basement where they can be content tinkering with a rack of servers. This extends to entire IT departments that seem out of touch with ‘real-world’ problems and unresponsive to business needs.

In *[Business/IT Alignment a Critical Factor When Determining IT's Role](http://www.gartner.com/document/code/129316)* (2005), Gartner analyst Michael Gerrard writes about the need to find “a well-understood role that results in the enterprise maximizing the effective use and value of IT.” The issue of business-IT alignment plagues many organizations, especially given the ever increasing role of computing technology in all aspects of business. Organizations push to transform an insular, technology-centric IT into a welcoming, business-centric unit aligned with business strategies, value chains, and governance. 

Fundamentally, the drive for business-IT alignment can be framed as a shift from IT as a filler to IT as a spiller. By their very nature, spillers are enthusiastic connectors with the general audience. They are the catalyst that makes the pool's bounty accessible to everyone. IT as a spiller is concerned with taking technical tools and transforming them into business tools; tools aligned with business strategies, and whose business values can be measured.

A spiller IT is friendly, comprehensible, and perhaps even exciting. Examples  can be seen on Twitter and Instagram when IT departments or whole companies share what they are doing on Twitter or Instagram and users' responses to them.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr"><a href="https://twitter.com/UCalgary_IT">@UCalgary_IT</a> Very happy with this!</p>&mdash; Michael Tom (@michaelrtom) <a href="https://twitter.com/michaelrtom/status/490292005553963008">July 19, 2014</a></blockquote> <script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="4" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAAGFBMVEUiIiI9PT0eHh4gIB4hIBkcHBwcHBwcHBydr+JQAAAACHRSTlMABA4YHyQsM5jtaMwAAADfSURBVDjL7ZVBEgMhCAQBAf//42xcNbpAqakcM0ftUmFAAIBE81IqBJdS3lS6zs3bIpB9WED3YYXFPmHRfT8sgyrCP1x8uEUxLMzNWElFOYCV6mHWWwMzdPEKHlhLw7NWJqkHc4uIZphavDzA2JPzUDsBZziNae2S6owH8xPmX8G7zzgKEOPUoYHvGz1TBCxMkd3kwNVbU0gKHkx+iZILf77IofhrY1nYFnB/lQPb79drWOyJVa/DAvg9B/rLB4cC+Nqgdz/TvBbBnr6GBReqn/nRmDgaQEej7WhonozjF+Y2I/fZou/qAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://instagram.com/p/5KsaupwrAv/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_top">One team of Italian entrepreneurs wants to change the way you interact with your home. When wireless access was only just becoming popular, they dreamed of being able to manage, control and protect their homes from anywhere in the world, using a smartphone. Led by Sergio Tucci, they started working on software programs that could speak to automation hardware. Several years later, these dreams have become reality with the launch of the home automation software, Easydom. The system allows users to control their home’s security, climate, lighting and just about everything else, from anywhere in the world. To learn more about Sergio and his team’s journey, visit Microsoft.com/stories</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Microsoft (@microsoft) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2015-07-15T18:37:01+00:00">Jul 15, 2015 at 11:37am PDT</time></p></div></blockquote> <script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

## Is IT a Filler or a Spiller?

The emphasis on business-IT alignment with its implicit transition to spiller IT can have an insidious side-effect in higher education, especially a [research-intensive institution like the University of Calgary](https://web.archive.org/web/20150422214843/http://www.ucalgary.ca/research/research-excellence). Exponentially advancing digital technologies, enhanced flows of capital, information, and talent, and global-scale competition, are factors that magnify the deleterious effects of failing to recognize the differences between fillers and spillers, which is further exacerbated by the presence of IT as a single, monolithic unit.

In transforming IT into a business friendly unit that is focused on delivering business *solutions*, the capability of IT to develop the fundamental structures that support the creation of solutions can easily be overlooked. That is, when IT operates as a single entity, it can very easily fall into a situation where fillers and spillers are set as diametric forces or with one in a subordinate position to the other. The needs of fillers are seen as IT wants, which become subservient to the needs of spillers that serve business wants.

    A very drastic form of this can seen in Digg v4. Digg is a technology news aggregation site created in late 2004 by Kevin Rose. It let users discover, share, and recommend web content through user submissions and votes. By 2008, it was valued at over US$200 million with over 236 million visitors annually. Digg's most visible content is supplied by a relatively small proportion of its users, influence by their stature in the community through historical votes. These popular content submitters were the fillers. Digg itself is then a massive spiller for its hundreds of million of visitors.
    
    In August 2010, Digg v4 (version 4) was released. The most significant change was to allow news sources to auto-submit their content to Digg, sidelining the the existing fillers in the process. It is suspected that Digg was [pressured to make this change](http://alexisohanian.com/an-open-letter-to-kevin-rose) [to appease investors](http://searchengineland.com/digg-v4-how-to-successfully-kill-a-community-50450) funding the site. The result of the move was dramatic. A mass user exodus ensued, with [traffic dropping by approximately 25%](http://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2010/09/23/diggs-traffic-is-collapsing-at-home-and-abroad/) within a month. Less than two years later, Digg was broken into three parts and sold at a valuation of less than 1/10 of its valuation 2 years prior.
    
    Digg is a striking example of the effects of ignoring or purposefully terminating fillers. Without its spillers, Digg very quickly exhausted content—timely news relevant to its users—to spill. Conversely, its existing fillers no longer had a spiller that connected them to an audience, diminishing their value. The end result for Digg was almost instantaneous, wiping out nearly all the business value it had built up.


On the University of Calgary IT website, the following tagline [appears under Information Technologies](http://www.ucalgary.ca/it/).

    Delivering technology solutions through effective, sustainable and responsible planning and design

Similarly, this is the stated [IT mission](http://www.ucalgary.ca/it/about).

    We enable learning, leading research and supporting services for our university community by leveraging information technologies and protecting information assets. As a trusted leader, we deliver technology solutions through effective, sustainable and responsible planning and design. We focus on being service oriented, responsive, innovative and collaborative.

Notice the emphasis on *delivering solutions* in both statements. Now, consider the structure of the IT organization, implemented in January 2015.

(insert simplified org chart here)

IT at the University of Calgary is structured as a spiller only. No part of the organization is designed to support a filler role, for both internal and external audiences.