_drafts/innovation-technology.markdown, before:

---
layout: post
title: "Innovation+Technology"
---

What is *IT* in higher education institutions?

IT—also known as Information Technology—is perhaps a nebulous term, capable of summoning joy, anger, disgust, fear, and sadness in just two dimunitive letters. From fixing the printer down the hall to running an enterprise system for scheduling classrooms, IT touches on an immensely broad spectrum of devices, services, and users. Gartner's [Agenda Overview for Higher Education (2015)](http://www.gartner.com/document/2957119) opens by saying, “IT in general, and the CIO in particular, are now key components in making a higher education institution more competitive through a digital edition of its mission.” There is a broad awareness that IT plays a role in digital education. However, the treatment of IT as a singular unit for technology is a serious impediment to realizing business value—academic, research, or otherwise—in the 21st century higher education institution.

IT is commonly used as a synonym for computers. To my parents, I work with computers. Gigabytes, passwords, WiFi, and email; these are the lingua franca of IT. In the 1990s, computers were things that could (one day) augment everyday tasks, making them faster and easier. The [AT&T *You Will* advertisements](http://www.businessinsider.com/att-predicted-the-future-in-these-1993-ads-2013-5?op=1) in 1993 are a great example of the perception of computers as process catalysts in everyday life.

Commit message:

Add service definition for U of C IT accounts
Archived at
https://web.archive.org/web/20150507222857/http://www.ucalgary.ca/it/ser
vices/it-account.

_drafts/innovation-technology.markdown, after:

---
layout: post
title: "Innovation+Technology"
---

What is *IT* in higher education institutions?

IT—also known as Information Technology—is perhaps a nebulous term, capable of summoning joy, anger, disgust, fear, and sadness in just two dimunitive letters. From fixing the printer down the hall to running an enterprise system for scheduling classrooms, IT touches on an immensely broad spectrum of devices, services, and users. Gartner's [Agenda Overview for Higher Education (2015)](http://www.gartner.com/document/2957119) opens by saying, “IT in general, and the CIO in particular, are now key components in making a higher education institution more competitive through a digital edition of its mission.” There is a broad awareness that IT plays a role in digital education. However, the treatment of IT as a singular unit for technology is a serious impediment to realizing business value—academic, research, or otherwise—in the 21st century higher education institution.

IT is commonly seen as a synonym for computers. To my parents, I work with computers. At the University of Calgary, the prescribed purpose for having an IT account is to [access computing services on campus](http://www.ucalgary.ca/it/services/it-account).” Gigabytes, passwords, WiFi, and email are the expected lingua franca of IT. In the 1990s, computers were understood as things that could (one day) augment everyday tasks, making them faster and easier. The [AT&T *You Will* advertisements](http://www.businessinsider.com/att-predicted-the-future-in-these-1993-ads-2013-5?op=1) from 1993 are a great example of the perception of computers as process catalysts in everyday life.
