_drafts/university-it.markdown, before:

---
layout: post
title: "University IT"
---

On March 2, 2015, the Chief Information Officer at the University of Calgary resigned, continuing Information Technology's revolving door problem. Since 2009, CIOs—both interim and permanent—have flowed through the unit at a regular pace. The most recent CIO to resign made a point in town hall meetings of committing to the position beyond the typical 18-month life span, a goal he would fail to achieve.

The transient nature of University of Calgary IT leadership is a troubling issue. In the past six years, there have been three overhauls of the department, including the creation and destruction of entire directorates. Constant change in leadership results in vision without execution, as commitments to strategies dissolve when leaders resign or are abruptly removed.

In a Gartner survey of higher education CIOs, the [mean tenure was found to be seven and one-half years](http://www.gartner.com/document/589708), far above the average of ?? months at the University of Calgary. The survey also found that “more-research-intensive institutions have slightly longer-tenured CIOs.” The contrast with the University of Calgary is stark.

The CIO challenge at the University of Calgary resemble issues with CIOs in the United States federal government. A 2011 report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office found the [typical tenure at the CIO position at less than 2 years](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-634). In an interview with CIO Journal, Van Hitch—former CIO at the U.S. Department of Justice—[postulated on some of the reasons for this and its impacts](http://deloitte.wsj.com/cio/2014/04/22/federal-cios-leaving-so-soon/).

    **Why do so many agency CIOs want to leave their jobs after such a short period of time?**

    **Hitch**: It’s a very difficult job, and in many ways, a thankless one. I often equate it to running at sprint speed for an entire marathon. Crises arise every day. To keep progress moving on longer term policies and strategic initiatives, agency CIOs must run at peak speed and never slow down.

    **How does this CIO revolving door affect agency IT operations and initiatives?**

    The cost in terms of morale and efficiency can be significant. Leadership changes in any organization can affect productivity. In the absence of strong leadership and clear objectives, employees begin worrying about job security, strategic initiatives lose momentum, and basically everything is put on hold until the new leader is in place. When this happens every two years, the result can be a permanent—and costly—state of bureaucratic inertia. Today, the federal government spends roughly $80 billion annually on IT. I estimate that if agencies could keep strong leaders in place and employees focused and productive, the government could likely save 15 percent of its annual IT outlay, which could then be reinvested in mission-enhancing initiatives.

One of the costs of leadership turnover can be seen in the latest internal audit results of Information Technologies, which has garnered the attention of the Board of Governors with remediations placed as the highest priorities for the department, above all other requests. The four remediation program streams—security, data centre, disaster recovery, and governance—cut across the core of IT, hinting at the significant deficiencies accumulated over the past decade.

##

Commit message:

Move Fillers and Spillers in Higher Ed to Univ IT
The text is too specific to the University of Calgary, and is better
suited to the University IT essay.

_drafts/university-it.markdown, after:

---
layout: post
title: "University IT"
---

On March 2, 2015, the Chief Information Officer at the University of Calgary resigned, continuing Information Technology's revolving door problem. Since 2009, CIOs—both interim and permanent—have flowed through the unit at a regular pace. The most recent CIO to resign made a point in town hall meetings of committing to the position beyond the typical 18-month life span, a goal he would fail to achieve.

The transient nature of University of Calgary IT leadership is a troubling issue. In the past six years, there have been three overhauls of the department, including the creation and destruction of entire directorates. Constant change in leadership results in vision without execution, as commitments to strategies dissolve when leaders resign or are abruptly removed.

In a Gartner survey of higher education CIOs, the [mean tenure was found to be seven and one-half years](http://www.gartner.com/document/589708), far above the average of ?? months at the University of Calgary. The survey also found that “more-research-intensive institutions have slightly longer-tenured CIOs.” The contrast with the University of Calgary is stark.

The CIO challenge at the University of Calgary resemble issues with CIOs in the United States federal government. A 2011 report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office found the [typical tenure at the CIO position at less than 2 years](http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-634). In an interview with CIO Journal, Van Hitch—former CIO at the U.S. Department of Justice—[postulated on some of the reasons for this and its impacts](http://deloitte.wsj.com/cio/2014/04/22/federal-cios-leaving-so-soon/).

    **Why do so many agency CIOs want to leave their jobs after such a short period of time?**

    **Hitch**: It’s a very difficult job, and in many ways, a thankless one. I often equate it to running at sprint speed for an entire marathon. Crises arise every day. To keep progress moving on longer term policies and strategic initiatives, agency CIOs must run at peak speed and never slow down.

    **How does this CIO revolving door affect agency IT operations and initiatives?**

    The cost in terms of morale and efficiency can be significant. Leadership changes in any organization can affect productivity. In the absence of strong leadership and clear objectives, employees begin worrying about job security, strategic initiatives lose momentum, and basically everything is put on hold until the new leader is in place. When this happens every two years, the result can be a permanent—and costly—state of bureaucratic inertia. Today, the federal government spends roughly $80 billion annually on IT. I estimate that if agencies could keep strong leaders in place and employees focused and productive, the government could likely save 15 percent of its annual IT outlay, which could then be reinvested in mission-enhancing initiatives.

One of the costs of leadership turnover can be seen in the latest internal audit results of Information Technologies, which has garnered the attention of the Board of Governors with remediations placed as the highest priorities for the department, above all other requests. The four remediation program streams—security, data centre, disaster recovery, and governance—cut across the core of IT, hinting at the significant deficiencies accumulated over the past decade.

## Fillers and Spillers in Higher Education

Higher education institutions that focus on transforming IT with a sharp focus on business alignment are unintentionally hampering themselves. In a research-intensive institution like The University of Calgary, there are generally two major business entities—academia and research—each performing both administrative and operative functions. 

Information Technologies at the university is a traditional IT department that in recent years has focused heavily on fostering business partnerships, service management, portfolio management, and operational stability. Consider the department's [mission statement](http://www.ucalgary.ca/it/about) and a word cloud of accomplishments created for a department town-hall meeting in 2014.

    We enable learning, leading research and supporting services for our university community by leveraging information technologies and protecting information assets. As a trusted leader, we deliver technology solutions through effective, sustainable and responsible planning and design. We focus on being service oriented, responsive, innovative and collaborative.

(insert word cloud here)

The mission states that IT delivers “technology solutions”, and the word cloud demonstrates what the department deems to be solutions.

Now, examine the structure of the IT organization.

(insert simplified org chart here)

IT at the University of Calgary is structured as a spiller only. No part of the organization is designed to support a filler role, for both internal and external audiences. The consequences of this have been growing.
